Rohan Gautam's blog post : Building a reliable and tRUSTworthy web service 🦀 (#51)
Holmusk/holmusk.github.io: blog/2021-05-29-using-rust.md

---
title: <undecided>
author: Rohan
github: RohanGautam
description: Explore the use of rust in FoodDX, and go over key architectural decisions
tags: rust
---

# Introduction to the product FoodDX

## Product intro

[FoodDX](https://www.fooddx.com/) is a service which helps people get insights on how to improve their diet with the help from our proprietary AI technology and personalized feedback from our nutrition experts. In it's current stage, it helps score images of food taken through an app, and gives it a score from 1-5, and also provides personalized tips for the food.

It's a big project with a lot of components - the AI models, the app, and the backend infrastructure which handles it all. We'll be taking a look at the backend in this article.

## Lifecycle of an image

Before we dive into the infrastructure, it would help to take a look at what an image goes through once it enters our system.

- The image is assigned a UUID.
- The image is uploaded to a `s3` bucket.
- The image is then downloaded, preprocessed, run through our models, and a food tip is generated for the image.

> - The food tip, inference results and the image hash form the final response.

Reviewer: Add a link to `image hash` (you can expand on it in a footer or something like that) that explains that we use the `image hash` to check for duplicate images

Author: ✅ agreed

## Stack decisions: Rust and haskell

Haskell is used for the client facing API, and it's for other ad-hoc tasks such as reading/writing to a database among others.

Rust is used for image preprocessing, model inference and sending the results back. Sending of results was done differently in the two approaches outlined below. Rust was chosen for it's high efficiency, small executable footprint, and absence of a garbage collector. It also had strong type system, speed & relatively actively maintained Tensorflow (client) library.

# Introduction and pitfalls of the existing architecture

![](/images/v2-arch-diagram.png)
The internal organization of the rust service in this architecture is outlined above.

> There were 3 main parts, all running concurrently on 3 separate tokio runtimes - namely polling sqs, preprocessing and inferring from the images, and cleanup tasks.

Reviewer: I would advise a quick intro to Rust async runtimes 
OR 
We assume the reader has to have some basic knowledge of the Rust ecosystem
OR 
We link to `tokio.rs` webpage/documentation that explains briefly what tokio is 
OR 
We can add a quick `Note` type thing with a brief explanation of `tokio` (doesn't have to be written by us)

Reviewer: SQS -> Link to AWS SQS Documentation along with a one-liner explaining what SQS is 
Pre-processing -> One-liner explaining that our ML models expect small/fixed image dimensions
Inferring -> I think this is called `running inference on` or something. Can ask Matthew to review that line or ask him for what is the correct terminology. 
Cleanup tasks -> Explain what "cleanup tasks" are there to be done (can be short) and that since the result is not dependent on them, they can be done after we return the result or write the result out to Redis (depending on how much detail we wish to provide).

Author: thanks for the input! implemented them in an upcoming commit.

Regarding preprocessing, I think it's understood that image classification models take a fixed length image tensor, it's fairly standard to assume that preprocessing would/does involve that imo. I don't think we need to justify the preprocessing 🤔

Author: feel free to mark as unresolved if need be!

The external processes related to this architecture are outlined below.
![](/images/v2-external-arch-diagram.png)

> The main gripe we had was in the `S3` to `SQS` upload event notification. In our experiments, it was [very slow](https://github.com/Holmusk/aws_benchmarks/tree/master/s3_event_to_sqs), and we aim for the service to have a very low latency, with the goal being that every image that comes into the system should be scored/rated in under 1 second. Because of the way the system was designed, this meant that we'd need a pretty big makeover on the rust side, and some tweaks on the haskell side. This is also mentioned in the [AWS docs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/NotificationHowTo.html), where they point that `Typically, event notifications are delivered in seconds but can sometimes take a minute or longer`.

Reviewer: experiments -> benchmarks 
Also ensure that the `s3_event_to_sqs` repo is publicly accessible or raise a request to Subra to make it public. 
`under 1 second` -> make this bold. 

Because of the way the system was designed, this meant that we'd need a pretty big makeover on the rust side, and some tweaks on the haskell side `if we were to get closer to meeting our performance goals`

where they point that -> where they state that

Author: Thanks! Btw the repo linked (`s3_event_to_sqs`) was publicly accessible, that's why I included it in the blog, so all good there

> # The new architecture

Reviewer: Do mention that it's called `v3` internally (you can add it in brackets). 
This would leave space for a potential blog post on _another_ architecture and avoid confusion (if we ever re-architect in the future).

Author: hmmm, but we're comparing `v2` and `v3` here, if we say that then that would imply a `v1` also existing right? Don't think it might be the best idea to get readers involved with the versioning 🤔 
I think we can combat the issue you raise by renaming the articles and/or the description of the articles in the future if new ones come out.
wdy think

Author: feel free to unresolve this, just resolving for the time being to keep track of things ⚡

> Like mentioned before, the main reason for redesigning the architecture was to avoid the `S3` to `SQS` upload event notification as speed was of high importance. In the process, we found out that we actually simplified it, by removing unnecessary moving parts.

Reviewer: Like mentioned before -> As mentioned above
speed -> low latency 

was of high importance -> is a very high priority in this project/service

> Internally, the rust service now also has a webserver. The client facing API proxies the requests it receives to the rust webservers via a load balancer. In this version, we completely eliminate the use of SQS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Internally, the Rust service now also has a web server. The client facing API (written in Haskell) proxies the HTTP requests it receives to the Rust server via a load balancer (AWS ELB). In this version of the architecture (v3), we completely eliminate the use of a queue(SQS).
```

Link to what a web server is -> https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/What_is_a_web_server

This is to avoid any ambiguity and give readers with little context, a better chance at understanding the post

Author: looks good! I won't be mentioning `v3` or any version numbers anywhere though, because that might lead to more confusion. good to make webservers more clear tho ⚡

## Rust webserver internals

![](/images/v3-arch-diagram.png)

> We use a [`warp`](https://github.com/seanmonstar/warp) for the webserver in rust.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have chosen to use [`warp`](https://github.com/seanmonstar/warp) for the web server implementation in Rust.
```

Add a one-liner explaining our decision of `warp` and why it fits our use-case. 

Later on in the post you can also add any cons/limitations that we faced down the road after making the decision to use `warp` (I'm personally curious and I need to know this for future maintenance purposes 😅 )

Author: Cool! We actually didn't really face any limitations with warp tbh. It had support for everything we needed and then some. So not sure what i would add onto it. 
Was actually really fun to use. Excellent tokio interop and the `Filter` system, which uses macros to define the routes and the arguments were really elegant and straightforward :D

> Because we have multiple tokio runtimes, the messages are passed between them using a bounded channel. We also have an extra batching step, which converts a bunch of independent requests into a batch. The batching step is important as the model inference is efficient for an image batch as compared to a single image. Also, with a batch, we can parallelize the image download and preprocessing steps for extra speed gains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have 3 tokio runtimes running simultaneous and somewhat independently of one another. These tokio runtimes communicate with each other using messages that are passed between them using bounded channels. 
```

Let me know if the above sounds factually or technically incorrect. 

- Link to what a `channel` is 
- Link to footer where you can elaborate what "message"s are passed between channels i.e. you can say it is just a custom Rust type containing relevant information about an image

Author: Cool! I felt these were fairly standard, so linked the chapter on channels on the rust book instead of adding a footnote. Also felt that defining the what the messages were made more sense in the main paragraph and not the footnote.

Thanks for a detailed review and suggested change ⚡ 😄

---
title: Building a reliable and tRUSTworthy web service 🦀
author: Rohan
github: RohanGautam
description: Explore the use of rust in FoodDX, and go over key architectural decisions
tags: rust
---

## Product intro

> [FoodDX](https://www.fooddx.com/) is a service which helps people get insights on how to improve their diet with the help from our proprietary AI technology and personalized feedback from our nutrition experts. In it's current stage, it helps score images of food taken through an app, and gives it a score from 1-5, and also provides personalized tips for the food.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[FoodDX](https://www.fooddx.com/) is a service which helps people get insights on how to improve their diet with the help from our proprietary AI technology and personalized feedback from our nutrition experts. In its current stage, it helps score images of food taken through an app, and gives it a score from 1-5, and also provides personalized tips for the food.
```

It's a big project with a lot of components - the AI models, the app, and the backend infrastructure which handles it all. We'll be taking a look at the backend in this article.

## Lifecycle of an image

Before we dive into the infrastructure, it would help to take a look at what an image goes through once it enters our system.

- The image is assigned a UUID.

> - The image is uploaded to a `s3` bucket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The image is uploaded to an `AWS S3` bucket.
```

- The image is then downloaded, preprocessed, run through our models, and a food tip is generated for the image.

> - The food tip, inference results and the image hash [^1] form the final response.

Reviewer: Is there a way to link these to the bottom explanations/elaborations of the footer comments? Not a big deal tho

Author: yeah! the [^1] shows up as a link to the comments

Author: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/17317792/119948843-d81d5780-bfcb-11eb-8c7e-5b67b5b72ec8.png)
like dis

## Stack decisions: Rust and Haskell

> Haskell is used for the client facing API, and it's for other ad-hoc tasks such as reading/writing to a database among others.

Reviewer 2: Feels like missing word (?)
```suggestion
Haskell is used for the client facing API, and it's used for other ad-hoc tasks such as reading/writing to a database among others.
```

> Rust is used for image preprocessing, model inference and sending the results back. Sending of results was done differently in the two approaches outlined below. Rust was chosen for it's high efficiency, small executable footprint, and absence of a garbage collector. It also had strong type system, speed & relatively actively maintained Tensorflow (client) library.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Rust is used for image preprocessing, model inference and sending the results back. Sending of results was done differently in the two approaches outlined below. Rust was chosen for its high efficiency, small executable footprint, and absence of a garbage collector. It also had strong type system, speed & relatively actively maintained Tensorflow (client) library.
```

# Introduction and pitfalls of the existing architecture

> ![](../images/blogposts/v2-arch-diagram.png)

Reviewer 3: In this image,
<img width="306" alt="Screenshot 2021-05-28 at 11 16 55 AM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/15181803/119936411-c5445c00-bfa6-11eb-93c7-c8808b7afa3d.png">

I think it should be model is loaded OR models are loaded?

Author: ay good catch man! Thanks a lot :D Should def have an "are" in there

> ![](../images/blogposts/v2-arch-diagram.png)

Reviewer: Do we have whimsical links or something to the diagrams? Just for future/maintenance purposes? 🤔 
Again, not really necessary, just asking.

Author: yep!
> https://whimsical.com/blog-diagrams-T6RT58Szwvg6Vujd3NK8cf

Reviewer: Thanks!

The internal organization of the rust service in this architecture is outlined above.

> There were 3 main parts, all running concurrently on 3 separate tokio[^2] runtimes - namely polling sqs, preprocessing and running inference on the images, and cleanup tasks (like writing results to redis, notifying SQS that the image can now be taken off the queue, etc).

Reviewer 3: At some places it's `sqs` and `SQS` at others. I think it'd be nice to have it consistent across the blog.

Reviewer 3: Also, I believe you meant _There are 3 main parts_ instead of _There were 3 main parts_

Reviewer 3: My bad. It should be _were_.

Internally, the Rust service now also has a [webserver](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/What_is_a_web_server). The client facing API (written in Haskell) proxies the HTTP requests it receives to the Rust server via a load balancer (AWS ELB). In this version of the architecture, we completely eliminate the use of a queue (`SQS`).

## Rust webserver internals

![](../images/blogposts/v3-arch-diagram.png)

We have chosen to use [`warp`](https://github.com/seanmonstar/warp)[^4] for the web server implementation in Rust.

We have 3 tokio runtimes running simultaneous and somewhat independently of one another. These tokio runtimes communicate with each other using messages that are passed between them using bounded [channels](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch16-02-message-passing.html). The "messages" we pass are custom [`Structs`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch05-01-defining-structs.html) we define for communication.

> Finally, because each request handler needs a result for it's own image, the handler initially creates a [oneshot](https://tokio-rs.github.io/tokio/doc/tokio/sync/oneshot/index.html) for receiving it's results and this is passed along as metadata for the image. Once the image is inferred to in a batch, the data is sent back to the image's corresponding request handler so the results can be returned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, because each request handler needs a result for its own image, the handler initially creates a [oneshot](https://tokio-rs.github.io/tokio/doc/tokio/sync/oneshot/index.html) for receiving its results and this is passed along as metadata for the image. Once the image is inferred to in a batch, the data is sent back to the image's corresponding request handler so the results can be returned.
```

Reviewer 2: "Once the image is inferred to in a batch"

Maybe I just don't know this phrase, but "to" above doesn't make sense to me. Inferred "to what"?

Author: yep, missed that. thanks!

As mentioned, we have completely avoided the use of SQS in this architecture. The external architecture around the rust service now looks like this:

> ![](../images/blogposts/v3-external-arch-diagram.png)

Reviewer: This is a nit-pick but we can polish this diagram a bit : 
- Add a bounding box for `Client facing API`
- Straighten out `Return results back` arrow

### Types of channels used

We use a couple of different channels for communication with different parts within the rust service. Check out [this chapter](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch16-02-message-passing.html) from the rust book for some more context on how they work!

- [`std::sync::mpsc`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/sync/mpsc/index.html) : This is the only `sync` channel we use (rest are `async`). We use it to communicate to the `main` function that the models have been loaded. Since the `main` function is `sync`, we use the builtin synchronous channel rust provides.

The other channels are `async`, meaning they wouldn't block the runtime while `await`ing for a result. They instead would pass the control back to the async runtime (`tokio` in this case) and other tasks can be performed. The `async` channels are :

> - [`tokio::sync::oneshot`](https://docs.rs/tokio/1.5.0/tokio/sync/oneshot/index.html) : A oneshot is a channel which has only one reciever and one sender. The handler keeps the `Receiver` and sends it's `Sender` around the program. Once the processing is finished (a batch of requests are processed at a time) the oneshot is used to send the result back to the handler of that specific request, maintaining the one-one mapping of the request and response that's required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`tokio::sync::oneshot`](https://docs.rs/tokio/1.5.0/tokio/sync/oneshot/index.html) : A oneshot is a channel which has only one reciever and one sender. The handler keeps the `Receiver` and sends its `Sender` around the program. Once the processing is finished (a batch of requests are processed at a time) the oneshot is used to send the result back to the handler of that specific request, maintaining the one-to-one mapping of the request and response that's required.
```

- [`async_channel::bounded`](https://docs.rs/async-channel/1.6.1/async_channel/fn.bounded.html), which we use like a _MPSC_ (Multi Producer, Single Consumer) channel to pass data between many response handlers to the batching task, for example. It's used for communication between tasks. We'd like to use `tokio::sync::mpsc`, but :
  - Tokio `1.x` [removed `try_recv`](https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio/pull/3263) due to some errors. They plan on [adding it back](https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio/issues/3350) later. This was a function we had to use.
  - `async-channel` is [recommended](https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio/issues/3350#issuecomment-773952897) as an alternative for the time being.

# Takeaways

These are our takeaways for using Rust in this project!

Pros :

> - The Rust community is awesome! A lot of people mention that this is a big strength of the ecosystem, and we fully agree. We found the rust community to be very intelligent, responsive, and friendly when we asked questions on online forums like Reddit and Stackoverflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Rust community is awesome! A lot of people mention that this is a big strength of the ecosystem, and we fully agree. We found the Rust community to be very knowledgeable, responsive, and friendly when we asked questions on online forums like Reddit and Stackoverflow.
```

I would refrain from using the word `intelligent` here haha. Just a personal preference because some people may take it the wrong way. That's why I suggested replacing it with knowledgeable. We can think of another word/adjective, if necessary.

Author: fair!

> - The Rust book was a great resource. It had a lot of examples and explanations for Rust fundamentals, as well a great insight into multithreading and concurrency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Rust book is a great resource. It has a lot of examples and explanations for Rust fundamentals, as well a great insight into multi-threading and concurrency.
```

> - It's a little harder to refactor and make huge changes compared to other languages, but it's a worthwhile tradeoff for a critical service in our opinion, as it makes the code more robust. It's also easier to reason with ownership rules once you get the hang of it, compared to compiler magic that some other languages have.

Reviewer: Instead of `it`, you can specify `concept of borrowing/ownership` or something similar. 

Also, any reasons **why** you found it hard to refactor may be useful.

- _Tensorflow_ : We found that that the prebuilt tensorflow `C` bindings were not built/available for a large variety of GPU instances we use in AWS. This proved to be a little tedious to fix, as we had to manually compile tensorflow for the systems we use in production, without which we experienced slow inference times and model loading.
- It's pretty hard and largely undocumented how to run ML model inference **in parallel** on GPUs, and we still have not fully explored that option.

[^1]: The image hash is calculated and used to check for duplicates.
[^2]: [Tokio](https://tokio.rs/) is an asynchronous runtime for the Rust programming language. A lot of languages have a built in async runtime. Rust allows you to choose whichever runtime you require. Tokio is the most popular option in the Rust ecosystem. Check out [this resource](https://rust-lang.github.io/async-book/08_ecosystem/00_chapter.html) for more insight into async and the rust async ecosystem!
[^3]: Amazon [`SQS`](https://aws.amazon.com/sqs/) is a fully managed queue which we were using to distribute messages to different Rust service instances.

> [^4]: We used [`warp`](https://github.com/seanmonstar/warp) because of it's excellent tokio interoperability and flexible [`Filter`](https://docs.rs/warp/0.1.0/warp/trait.Filter.html) system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[^4]: We used [`warp`](https://github.com/seanmonstar/warp) because of its excellent tokio interoperability and flexible [`Filter`](https://docs.rs/warp/0.1.0/warp/trait.Filter.html) system.
```
